Automation API Blog (#4396)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/automation-api/index.md

---
title: "The Pulumi Automation API - The Next Quantum Leap in IaC"
date: 2020-10-10

> meta_desc: "Introducing the Pulumi Automation API - Scaling Cloud Projects with Software, Not Humans"

Author: Only for the title. Happy to change the description though (but this was the original title I wanted to use).

Pulumi's approach of using general purpose languages enables a new way of doing Infrastructure as Code -- something we call Infrastructure as Software -- bringing all of the great lessons learned over decades of building software to your infrastructure (languages, IDEs, testing, debugging, componentization, packaging, versioning, and more).

Today we’re excited to announce the Pulumi Automation API, a powerful programmatic layer on top of Pulumi’s declarative Infrastructure as Software. The Automation API exposes Pulumi programs and stacks as strongly-typed and composable building blocks. No CLI, no human-in-the-loop, just code. Pulumi can be fully embedded inside your software projects - to power a wide range of custom cloud infrastructure automation projects within your cloud engineering team.

Pulumi customers are already applying the Automation API to an incredible breadth of different scenarios. We continue to be amazed by the creativity that it unlocks as a new fundamental building block for cloud engineering.

A few examples of the kinds of scenarios we’ve seen users apply the Pulumi Automation API to so far:

> - **Platform APIs** - Embedding Pulumi opens up a world of possibility for building internal  and public cloud platforms that serve your infrastructure abstractions, enabling new approaches to SaaS, including IaaS and PaaS products and platforms. Expose declarative infrastructure defined with your best practices behind a REST, gRPC, or Custom Resource API that can be easily consumed by developers and operators alike.

Author: "declarative infrastructure" is a very specific term I want to use here. Given that we're adding an imperative layer on-top of Pulumi, I don't want there to be any confusion that this still uses the underlying declarative model. I tried to incorporate the rest of the changes, but feel free to make another suggestion given this.

The Automation API is a new subpackage in each of Pulumi’s language-specific SDKs that provides APIs to create and manage Stacks and perform lifecycle operations like update, refresh, preview, and destroy. It is a strongly typed and safe way to use Pulumi in embedded contexts such as web servers without having to shell out to a CLI. You can define a Pulumi program as a function inside of your codebase rather than in a separate project and use methods to get and set config programmatically. The Automation API uses a gRPC interface to execute programs and control and communicate with the core Pulumi engine. It still requires a Pulumi CLI installation, as this is how we bundle and distribute the core engine. Today it’s available in preview for [TypeScript/JavaScript](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/pulumi/pulumi/sdk/v2/go/x/auto) and [Go](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/pulumi/pulumi/sdk/v2/go/x/auto), with support for [Python](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi/compare/auto/python) and [C#](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi/compare/auto/dotnet) under active development.

## Platform APIs

> For SaaS scenarios like deploying infrastructure in response to user action, shelling out and relying on scripts in online services brings operational challenges with observability and reliability. Automation API is just another package and can be instrumented, profiled, and monitored with your existing APM tools like Honeycomb, Prometheus, and Datadog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For SaaS scenarios like deploying infrastructure in response to user action, relying on shell scripts for online services brings operational challenges with observability and reliability. Automation API is just another package and can be instrumented, profiled, and monitored with your existing APM tools like Honeycomb, Prometheus, and Datadog.
```

> Automation API runs inside of your favorite frameworks and interacts with your other packages exactly as you’d expect. We can define custom declarative infrastructure and expose it to end users behind a familiar REST interface:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Automation API runs inside your favorite frameworks and interacts with your other packages exactly as you’d expect. We can define custom declarative infrastructure and expose it to end-users behind a familiar REST interface:
```

    router.HandleFunc("/sites", listHandler).Methods("GET")
    router.HandleFunc("/sites/{id}", getHandler).Methods("GET")
    router.HandleFunc("/sites/{id}", updateHandler).Methods("PUT")
    router.HandleFunc("/sites/{id}", deleteHandler).Methods("DELETE")

    // define and start our http server
    s := &http.Server{
        Addr:    ":1337",
        Handler: router,
    }
    fmt.Println("starting server on :1337")
    log.Fatal(s.ListenAndServe())
}
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{< /chooser >}}

TODO gif

Check out the full `Pulumi over HTTP` example in [TypeScript](https://github.com/pulumi/automation-api-examples/tree/main/nodejs/pulumiOverHttp-ts) and [Go](https://github.com/pulumi/automation-api-examples/tree/main/go/pulumi_over_http).

Here at Pulumi, we used Automation API as the foundation of our [Kubernetes Operator](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi-kubernetes-operator/pull/86) that exposes Pulumi stacks as Custom Resources. See how your own platform's operators can [take advantage of the Automation API](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi-kubernetes-operator/blob/master/pkg/controller/stack/stack_controller.go).

> We’re seeing customers reach for Automation API to build internal cloud platforms to empower their application teams, as well as independent software vendors using it to build and sell public cloud offerings like SaaS database products.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We’re seeing customers reach for Automation API to build internal cloud platforms to empower their application teams and independent software vendors to build and sell public cloud offerings like SaaS database products.
```

## Complex Workflow Orchestration

> There’s no longer a choice between small, decoupled units of infrastructure and a maintainable orchestration process. The Automation API executes just like any other code in your application, meaning that a single process can deploy infrastructure and manage related activities such as database migrations and blue/green deployments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Choosing between small, decoupled units of infrastructure and a maintainable orchestration process is no longer necessary. The Automation API executes just like any other code in your application, meaning that a single process can deploy infrastructure and manage related activities such as database migrations and blue/green deployments.
```

> Like any other Pulumi program, we define our cloud resources. In this case an AWS RDS database:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like any other Pulumi program, we define our cloud resources. In this case, an AWS RDS database:
```

{{< chooser language "typescript,go" >}}

{{% choosable language typescript %}}

```typescript
const clusterInstance = new aws.rds.ClusterInstance("dbInstance", {
    clusterIdentifier: cluster.clusterIdentifier,
    instanceClass: "db.t3.small",
    engine: "aurora-mysql",
    engineVersion: "5.7.mysql_aurora.2.03.2",
    publiclyAccessible: true,
    dbSubnetGroupName: subnetGroup.name,
});

return {
    host: cluster.endpoint,
    dbName,
    dbUser,
    dbPass
};
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{% choosable language go %}}

```go
_, err = rds.NewClusterInstance(ctx, "dbInstance", &rds.ClusterInstanceArgs{
    ClusterIdentifier:  cluster.ClusterIdentifier,
    InstanceClass:      pulumi.String("db.t3.small"),
    Engine:             pulumi.String("aurora-mysql"),
    EngineVersion:      pulumi.String("5.7.mysql_aurora.2.03.2"),
    PubliclyAccessible: pulumi.Bool(true),
    DbSubnetGroupName:  subnetGroup.Name,
})
if err != nil {
    return err
}

ctx.Export("host", cluster.Endpoint)
ctx.Export("dbName", dbName)
ctx.Export("dbUser", dbUser)
ctx.Export("dbPass", dbPass)
}
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{< /chooser >}}

> But with Automation API we can configure perform database migrations and preload rows in the same program:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But with Automation API, we can perform database migrations and preload rows in the same program:
```

    return r
})
app.Register(randomNumberService)

// a cloud web service that returns N of a random animal.
// this service takes a dependency on the URLs of the previously defined services
nAnimalsService := web.NewWebService("nAnimals", func() http.Handler {
    r := mux.NewRouter()
    // we'll read these variables in via requests to other services
    var num string
    var animal string
    handler := func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
        // Notice how we have the URL of randomNumberService
        // available to consume here!
        numResp := http.Get(randomNumberService.URL())
        num = readResponse(numResp)

        // Notice how we have the URL of randomAnimalService
        // available to consume here!
        animalResp, err := http.Get(randomAnimalService.URL())
        animal = readResponse(animalResp)

        fmt.Fprintf(w, "Wow, you got %s %ss!", num, animal)
    }
    r.HandleFunc("/", handler)
    return r
})
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{< /chooser >}}

TODO gif

Check out the full `halloumi` source in [TypeScript](https://github.com/pulumi/halloumi/tree/main/nodejs) and [Go](https://github.com/pulumi/halloumi/tree/main/go).

> Like any other framework, you can even set a breakpoint to debug orchestration logic or the pulumi program itself including `Apply` callbacks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like any other framework, you can even set a breakpoint to debug orchestration logic or the pulumi program itself, including `Apply` callbacks.
```

```go
// query all stacks in the project
stacks := w.ListStacks(ctx)
expiration := time.Now().Add(-1 * FIVE_DAYS)
var stacksToDestroy []string
for _, stackSummary := range stacks {
    lastUpdateTime := time.Parse(time.RFC3339, stackSummary.LastUpdate)
    // mark all stacks past expriation date for deletion
    if lastUpdateTime.Before(expiration) {
        stacksToDestroy = append(stacksToDestroy, stackSummary.Name)
        fmt.Printf("Found expired stack %s last deployed at %s\n", stackSummary.Name, stackSummary.LastUpdate)
    }
}

fmt.Printf("Found %d stacks to clean up\n", len(stacksToDestroy))

success := 0
for _, sName := range stacksToDestroy {
    stack := auto.SelectStack(ctx, sName, w)

    fmt.Printf("destroying stack %s\n", sName)

    // tail logs to stdout
    stdoutStreamer := optdestroy.ProgressStreams(os.Stdout)
    // destroy the expired stack
    stack.Destroy(ctx, stdoutStreamer)
    success++
    fmt.Printf("removing stack %s and all associated config and history\n", sName)
    w.RemoveStack(ctx, sName)
    fmt.Printf("stack %s successfully reaped \n", sName)
}

fmt.Printf("destroyed %d stack(s)\n", success)
```

> Our VM provisioner uses Automation API, but it’s backed by Pulumi’s desired state model. This means that there’s no chance of resources leaking or getting lost. Check out the full [`vmgr` example here](https://github.com/pulumi/automation-api-examples/tree/main/go/vm_manager_azure). For a cloud native example, take a look at our `eksctl` inspired [`aksctl` for Azure AKS](https://github.com/jaxxstorm/aksctl).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our VM provisioner uses Automation API, backed by Pulumi’s desired state model. This means that there’s no chance of resources leaking or getting lost. Check out the full [`vmgr` example here](https://github.com/pulumi/automation-api-examples/tree/main/go/vm_manager_azure). For a cloud-native example, take a look at our `eksctl` inspired [`aksctl` for Azure AKS](https://github.com/jaxxstorm/aksctl).
```

## Give it a Try Today!

> The Automation API is your tool to tame Cloud Engineering complexity and give your team the leverage to automate your cloud infrastructure. It is fully open source and available today for TypeScript/JavaScript and Go. Want to learn more? Come hang out with us in the [#automation-api community slack channel](https://pulumi-community.slack.com/archives/C019YSXN04B). Download the latest Pulumi release and check out these resources to get started:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Automation API is your tool to tame Cloud Engineering complexity and give your team the leverage to automate your cloud infrastructure. It is completely open source and available today for TypeScript/JavaScript and Go. Want to learn more? Come hang out with us in the [#automation-api community slack channel](https://pulumi-community.slack.com/archives/C019YSXN04B). Download the latest Pulumi release and check out these resources to get started:
```

- [Go documentation](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/pulumi/pulumi/sdk/v2/go/x/auto)
- [JavaScript/TypeScript documentation](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/reference/pkg/nodejs/pulumi/pulumi/x/automation/)
- [The Automation API examples repo](https://github.com/pulumi/automation-api-examples/tree/main/go/database_migration)
- The list of [known issues](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Aarea%2Fautomation-api). Please [file more](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi/issues/new?assignees=&labels=needs-triage&template=bug_report.md&title=) as you find them!
- [The Pulumi Kubernetes Operator](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi-kubernetes-operator)
- [aksctl](https://github.com/jaxxstorm/aksctl)
- [Halloumi](https://github.com/pulumi/halloumi)

> Last, we'd like to give a special thank you to the members of the community who have consulted with us, chimed in on the [original github issue](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi/issues/3901), and have been there for the journey in [community slack](https://pulumi-community.slack.com/archives/C019YSXN04B).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'd like to give a special thank you to the community members who have consulted with us, chimed in on the [original GitHub issue](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi/issues/3901), and have been there for the journey in [community slack](https://pulumi-community.slack.com/archives/C019YSXN04B).
```

---
title: "The Pulumi Automation API - The Next Quantum Leap in IaC"
date: 2020-10-19
meta_desc: "Introducing the Pulumi Automation API - Scaling Cloud Projects with Software, Not Humans"
meta_image: automation_api.png
authors:
    - evan-boyle
tags:
    - automation api
---

> Today’s Infrastructure as Code platforms have enabled organizations to build rich, reliable, and complex cloud-based applications and architectures. But as teams move to modern cloud technologies and reorganize their engineering organizations to get the full power and agility of the cloud, they continue looking for ways to drive increased software-driven automation.  While modern Infrastructure as Code tools bring key software engineering benefits to cloud engineering, they remain focused on human-driven workflows. For example, a person running `pulumi up` at their terminal or wiring the Pulumi CLI into their CI/CD system. To scale up how we deploy and manage cloud infrastructure and ultimately unlock the cloud's value and agility, we believe it will be critical to building software systems around our Infrastructure as Code platforms - systems that scale with software, not just humans.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today’s Infrastructure as Code platforms let organizations build rich, reliable, and complex cloud-based applications and architectures. But as teams move to modern cloud technologies,  they continue to search for ways to drive increased software-driven automation. Although modern Infrastructure as Code tools bring key software engineering benefits to cloud engineering, they remain focused on human-driven workflows. For example, a person running `pulumi up` at their terminal or wiring the Pulumi CLI into their CI/CD system. 

To scale up how we deploy and manage cloud infrastructure and ultimately unlock the cloud's value and agility, we believe it will be critical to building software systems around our Infrastructure as Code platforms - systems that scale with software, not just humans.

<!--more-->
```

---
title: "The Pulumi Automation API - The Next Quantum Leap in IaC"
date: 2020-10-19
meta_desc: "Introducing the Pulumi Automation API - Scaling Cloud Projects with Software, Not Humans"
meta_image: automation_api.png
authors:
    - evan-boyle
tags:
    - automation api
---

Today’s Infrastructure as Code platforms let organizations build rich, reliable, and complex cloud-based applications and architectures. But as teams move to modern cloud technologies,  they continue to search for ways to drive increased software-driven automation. Although modern Infrastructure as Code tools bring key software engineering benefits to cloud engineering, they remain focused on human-driven workflows. For example, a person running `pulumi up` at their terminal or wiring the Pulumi CLI into their CI/CD system.

To scale up how we deploy and manage cloud infrastructure and ultimately unlock the cloud's value and agility, we believe it will be critical to building software systems around our Infrastructure as Code platforms - systems that scale with software, not just humans.

<!--more-->

> Pulumi's approach of using general purpose languages enables Infrastructure as Software -- bringing all of the great lessons learned over decades of building software to your infrastructure (languages, IDEs, testing, debugging, componentization, packaging, versioning, and more).

Reviewer 2: This paragraph feels a little oddly out of place to me.  Not a big deal - but doesn't seem to connect the general intro above to the specific announcement below.

Author: I got feedback that it was important to explicitly define "Infra as Software", which is where this came from.

        animalResp, err := http.Get(randomAnimalService.URL())
        animal = readResponse(animalResp)

        fmt.Fprintf(w, "Wow, you got %s %ss!", num, animal)
    }
    r.HandleFunc("/", handler)
    return r
})
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{< /chooser >}}

![Halloumi demo](halloumi.gif)

Check out the full `halloumi` source in [TypeScript](https://github.com/pulumi/halloumi/tree/main/nodejs) and [Go](https://github.com/pulumi/halloumi/tree/main/go).

Like any other framework, you can even set a breakpoint to debug orchestration logic or the pulumi program itself, including `Apply` callbacks.

![Debuggin demo](debugging.gif)

## Supercharged Ops Tooling

Cloud infrastructure is beyond the days of driving deployments and infrastructure by hand, even though many of our tools are CLIs for manual workflows. Cloud engineering demands automated tools to keep up with growth, not just in terms of pace but also in complexity.

Have a look at our temporary development VM provisioner for Azure `vmgr`. A simple Cobra CLI command creates a new stack with a VM ready to go:

```go
func NewAddCmd() *cobra.Command {
    return &cobra.Command{
        Use:   "add",

>         Short: "add deploys an additional additional vm stack",

Reviewer 3: word duplicated:

`add deploys an additional` **additional** ...

                stackName := fmt.Sprintf("vmgr%d", rangeIn(10000000, 99999999))
                // create a new stack for our VM with an Inline program.
                // the program is nil for now, but we'll set it later after retrieving some dependent outputs.
                s, err := auto.NewStackInlineSource(ctx, stackName, projectName, nil /* Program */)
                fmt.Println("ensuring network is configured...")
                // lookout network and resource group info
                subnetID, rgName, err := EnsureNetwork(ctx, projectName)
                // set our program for the deployment with the resulting network info
                stack.SetProgram(GetDeployVMFunc(subnetID, rgName))
                fmt.Println("deploying vm...")
                // deploy our VM stack
                stdoutStreamer := optup.ProgressStreams(os.Stdout)

                res, err := s.Up(ctx, stdoutStreamer)
                if err != nil {
                    fmt.Printf("Failed to deploy vm stack: %v\n", err)
                    os.Exit(1)
                }
                fmt.Printf("deployed server running at public IP %s\n", res.Outputs["ip"].Value)
            },

>         }

Reviewer 3: I think you are missing a `}` / `cobra.Command{}` is not closed

Author: Turns out it was a formatting issue! Thanks for catching this.
